---
title: College Was Always Vocational
description: Whether we like it or not.
date: 2026-07-20
layout: post
---
Within the United States today, there exists one universally accepted reason for students to pursue higher education: for better job prospects. 

College has become nearly synonymous with economic mobility. High schoolers are shown graphs of average lifetime income by level of education, incoming freshman are advised to pick a major based on their anticipated career, and, when asked why they chose to attend college, most students respond with primarily economic reasons. It seems a given that, in addition to whatever personal motivations you have for going to college, your _main_ reason is expected to be career-related. 

Some people take an opposing view: college isn't about getting a job, it's about getting an _education_. Your major, they say, isn't nearly as important as your having a degree to begin with, because a degree's value lies in the communication, time management, and critical thinking skills it develops independent of field-specific knowledge. This is the view I myself hold, that old, liberal, [Humboldtian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humboldtian_model_of_higher_education) ideal.

For narrative simplicity, I'll refer to the belief that higher education should primarily serve career interests as _vocationalism_, and to the inverse philosopy as _avocationalism_. For example: today, many college students are explicit _vocationalists_; I am an _avocationalist_.

As outlined above, vocationalism is extremely popular in modern America, so much so that it's seemingly become the default stance no matter how valuable you believe a college education to be. Debates about the usefulness of college today largely focus on whether college is the _most effective way_ to prepare students for their careers; they fundamentally presuppose a vocationalist philosophy.

Many avocationalists seem to sneer at both sides of this argument. "Education," they might say, "_used_ to be about _learning!_ Students would be taught how to _think_ and appreciate the _arts!_ Now they only learn what _businesses_ need them to know!" Many seem to nostalgize about the good old days of _real_ Liberal Arts education! Not like you kids have!

It's this very argument I aim to rebut in this essay. Despite my own avocationalism, I've come to the conclusion that universities as we know them today have never truly focused on conferring a broad Liberal Arts education. That is to say, __college has _always_ been for vocationalists.__
